Central American Policy on Comprehensive Risk Management Harmonized with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 PCGIR 2The total or partial reproduction of this publication is authorized with the following citation: PCGIR-MSRRD 2015-2030/CEPREDENAC/SICA-001-2017.  First edition, 2017.  Central America. The Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic (CEPREDENAC) contributes to the reduction of vulnerability and the impact of disasters as an integral part of the process of transformation and sustainable development in the region, in the framework of the Central American Integration System (SICA). Contributing to the safe and sustainable development of Central America3 Council of Representatives of CEPREDENAC 2017……………………………….........……………….........4 List of acronyms………………………..………………....5 Presentation……………………………………………….…6 Introduction…………………………………………………..7 I. WHY A POLICY FOR COMPREHENSIVE DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT?……………………………….........…....8 II. CONTEXT…………………………………………………..9 GLOBAL CONTEXT………………………...........………...……..9 REGIONAL CONTEXT……………...........…………..............10 III. WHAT IS THE CENTRAL AMERICAN COMPREHENSIVE DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY (PCGIR)?………......................................................11 IV. PRINCIPLES, APPROACHES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE…………........................................................13 1. Principles………...........…………...........…………...........….......13 2. Approaches………...........…………...........…………..............14 B. OBJECTIVES………...........…………...........…………...........14 1. General Objective………...........…………...........…………...14 2. Special Objectives………...........…………...........………….14 C. SCOPE…............…………...........…………...........…………......15 1. In relation to Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management………...........…………...........…………...........…...16 2. In relation to territorial ordenance and development………...........…………...........…………...........…...16 V. CROSSCUTTING THEMES AND MEASURES............................................................17 A. DISASTER RISK REDUCTION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT………...........………….......17 1. Creation and systematization of public and private information for investment.………...........…..17 2. Evaluating Public and Private Investment…….18 3. Planning Public and Private Investment…….....18 4. Protecting Public and Private Investment ……18 5. Promoting Public and Private Investment…….18B. DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COMPENSATION TO REDUCE VULNERABILITY................................................................19 1. Incorporating disaster risk management in formal and non-formal education..............................19 2. Research and knowledge management........................................................................20 3. Exchange of experiences..........................................20 C. DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH CLIMATE CHANGE...........20 1. Harmonization of policies, strategies, and regulations on disaster risk reduction, environmental management and climate change adaptation..............................................................................21 2. Relationship between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation......21 D. TERRITORIAL MANAGEMENT, GOVERNABILITY, AND GOVERNANCE.................22 1. Strengthening capacities............................................23 2. Urban Risk Management............................................23 3. Territorial ordenance...................................................23 E. DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY...........................................................................24 1. Humanitarian aid coordination mechanisms for disaster response...............................................................24 2. Damage Assessment and Information Management.........................................................................24 3. Preparation and implementation to “Build Back Better”......................................................................................24 VI. IMPLEMENTATION PROCESSES, INSTRUMENTS AND MECHANISMS...................25 A. INSTITUTIONAL, ORGANIZATIONAL AND FUNCTIONAL COORDINATION AND STRENGTHENING..............................................................25 B. PARTICIPATION FROM SICA, CIVIL SOCIETY, THE PRIVATE SECTOR, FINANCIAL ENTITIES AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION................26 C. STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.....................26 D. PCGIR IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT......................................................................26 E. FINANCING THE PCGIR............................................26 VII. ORGANIZATIONAL FRAMEWORK TO IMPLEMENT THE POLICY.......................................27 A. STRUCTURE....................................................................27 B. PLANNING FRAMEWORK ......................................27 C. MONITORING AND ACCOUNTABILITY............27TABLE OF CONTENTS4M.Sc. Alexander Solís Delgado President of the National Commission for Risk Prevention and Emergency Attention (CNE), Republic of Costa Rica and Acting President of CEPREDENAC. Lic.  Carlos Rumbo Pérez Director General, National Civil Protection System (SINAPROC), Republic of Panama and Acting Vice-President of CEPREDENAC. Ing. William Hernández Director General, Civil Protection System; Disaster Prevention and Mitigation, Republic of El Salvador. Lic. Sergio García Cabañas Ing. Gabriel RubíExecutive Secretary, National Coordinator of Disaster Reduction (CONRED), Republic of Guatemala. National Commissioner, Permanent Contingency Commission (COPECO), Republic of Honduras. Dr. Guillermo González GonzálezMinister-Director General of the National System for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation and Attention, Republic of Nicaragua.COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES OF CEPREDENAC 2019 Licda. Claudia Herrera Melgar Executive Secretary of CEPREDENACExEcutivE  SEcrEtary  of cEPrEDENac5 CCAD Central American Commission for the Environment and Development CEPREDENAC Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic COP Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change CRRH Regional Water Resources Committee MecReg-SICA  Regional Mechanism for humanitarian assistance in cases of mid to large- scale disasters – Central American Integration System ODECA Organization of Central American States SDGs Sustainable Development Goals PCGIR Central American Policy on Comprehensive Risk Management GDP Gross Domestic Product UNDP United Nations Development Program PRRD Regional Disaster Risk Reduction Plan SE-CEPREDENAC Executive Secretariat of Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic SG-SICA General Secretariat of the Central American Integration System SICA Central American Integration System UNISDR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction UNU-EHS United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human SecurityLIST OF ACRONYMS6The creation of the Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic (CEPREDENAC) in 1987 and the signing of its Constituent Agreement in 2007 have contributed to reducing the vulnerability and impact of disasters that have been causing severe human and material losses in the region. These actions have been designed to contribute to Sustainable Development in accordance with the Tegucigalpa Protocol, the Partnership for Sustainable Development (ALIDES) and the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  In accordance with the integrated development process, and in response to the need to address the constant hazards of recurring disasters in Central America, the leaders and heads of state of the Central American Integration System (SICA) region approved the Central American Policy on Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management (PCGIR) in their 25th meeting on June 29 and 30, 2010. The PCGIR aims to provide the region with a guiding framework for comprehensive disaster risk management that complements and involves economic management, social cohesion management and environmental management using a systematic approach. To achieve the progressive application of this policy, CEPREDENAC received support from the SICA General Secretariat, the accompaniment of international cooperation agencies and the participation of Central American countries. As a result of the international commitments that were achieved, aligning this policy with the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) was promoted. The HFA’s 2005-2015 action plan is focused on increasing the resilience of nations and communities to disasters, particularly the most vulnerable populations such as indigenous and local communities.  According to the Hyogo Agreement, 168 Member states agreed to “the substantial reduction of disaster losses, in lives and in the social, economic and environmental assets of communities and countries” by 2015. In this set of actions, and in accordance with achieving a more coordinated and integrated management of SICA, the Central American Integration System was relaunched in 2010 with five major pillars that included the “Prevention and mitigation of disasters in response to the effects of climate change and geological hazards.” Following its commitment to implementing an action plan that is measureable over time to achieve the objectives contained within the five pillars and after analyzing the Hyogo Action Plan in 2015, the Central American Region is committed to harmonizing its Central American Policy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management so that it is aligned with the international commitments included in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. The Sendai Framework proposes a vision of the future focused on action, recognizing experiences, lessons learnt, and above all the obstacles and challenges to achieving better governance and specific actions to address disaster risk in the SICA region. Vinicio Cerezo Secretary General of the Central American Integration System. President of the Republic of Guatemala 1986-1991.PRESENTATION7 INTRODUCTION The Central American Integration System (SICA), through CEPREDENAC, brings together the efforts of the civil protection or risk management regulating entities. Additionally, SICA strengthens the region’s institutional capacities for comprehensive disaster risk reduction management, promotes regional policies and support for each country and coordinates efforts for planning public and private actions.  SICA uses the Central American Policy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management (PCGIR), which was approved at the 35th Ordinary Meeting of the Heads of State and Governments of SICA countries on June 30, 2010, as a reference point. More recently, CEPREDENAC promoted an innovative and participatory process in 2016 that brought together governmental actors, academics, civil society, the private sector, the financial sector and international cooperation agencies in order to review, adjust and harmonize the PCGIR with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. The PCGIR, adjusted and harmonized on the conceptual frameworks and actions derived from the Sendai Framework in the area of disaster risk reduction, faces the challenge of generating a resilient region for present and future generations that is in harmony with the environment for the full development of people’s lives, to reducing poverty and inequality and making progress towards the achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) using a comprehensive, inclusive and multidimensional perspective.  The adjusted and harmonized PCGIR aims to be a guiding framework for comprehensive disaster risk management actions in the region and for each of the countries. The goal is for this instrument to become the basis for consolidating efforts to help prevent, reduce and strengthen resilience to the effects that disasters cause in the Central American region.  M.Sc. Alexander Solís Delgado Acting President of CEPREDENAC, 2019 Licda. Claudia Herrera Melgar Executive Secretary of CEPREDENAC8 I. WHY A POLICY FOR COMPREHENSIVE DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT? Central America has a territorial extension of 522,760 square kilometers. Its location and geomorphology make it a zone with multiple hazards that is exposed to a prolonged hurricane season in both the Caribbean Sea and Pacific Ocean. There are active tectonic plates in Central America, which means that the region has a high level of seismic activity, volcanic eruptions and other hazards such as floods, droughts, landslides, forest fires and loss of biodiversity. These disasters have been increasing due to the effects of climate change. This makes the Central American region the second most vulnerable region in the world to climatic risks.  In Central America, the conditions of social, economic and political vulnerability, amongst others, are manifested in the level of exposure and fragility to hazards. Large investments in infrastructure, urban development, health systems, education, transportation, communication, water, agriculture, energy and other sectors continue to be made without considering the risk of disasters. According to the Regional Report on the state of vulnerability and disaster risk in Central America, the impact of disasters1  has increased by four times since the 1970s.  This report establishes that the countries of the Central American region have made progress towards reducing poverty. However, in absolute numbers, the figures continue to be very high, as there were 11.2 million people in the 1990s with scarce resources, which rose to 14.5 million by 2010. This is a high vulnerability factor. Additionally, the levels of exposure to risk are high in Central America: 79% of the population and 80% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) are exposed to two or more risks. Other data contained in the Global Climate Risk Index highlights that in Central America disasters linked to natural hazards cause annual losses equal to approximately 1.7% of the regional GDP, while adapting to climate change has an approximate cost of 1% of the GDP.2 One of the existing initiatives for classifying disaster risk is the World Disaster Risk Report published in 2016 by the Institute for the Environment and Human Security of the United Nations University and Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft. This index is calculated using 28 individual indicators and classifies disaster risk for 171 countries in relation to five natural hazards: earthquakes; hurricanes; floods; landslides and an increase in sea level. Disaster risk refers to the combination of the areas or countries that are potentially prone to disasters and the social, economic and ecological conditions in the respective countries. The following Central American countries are amongst the 15 countries most at risk in the world: Guatemala (4); Costa Rica (8); El Salvador (11); and Nicaragua (14). The countries and institutions that are part of the Central American Integration System (SICA) have adopted policies, strategies, plans and agreements aimed at achieving safe and sustainable development. However, the increasing impact of disasters demonstrates that risk prevention and reduction processes must be reinforced and coordinated, commitments need to be strengthened and investments need to be increased. The institutional and planning arrangements guided by regional and international agreements need to be updated.  Hazards that are both small and large scale, frequent and infrequent, sudden and slowly evolving, and either have a natural or human origin are present in the Central American region, which means it is also necessary to strengthen the coordination and promotion of mechanisms at regional and intersectoral levels.  A strategic instrument that incorporates and consolidates the comprehensive vision of disaster risk management and its indivisible relationship with development is necessary in order to adequately respond to this problem. For the SICA countries, this instrument is the Central American Policy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management (PCGIR). The PCGIR will be in force from 2017 to 2030.   1. UNISDR-CEPREDENAC. 2014.  Regional Report on the State of Vulnerability and Disaster Risks in Central America  2. UNISDR-CEPREDENAC. 2014. Regional Report on the State of Vulnerability and Disaster Risks in Central America9 II. CONTEXT 3. UNISDR website: https:// www.unisdr.org/files/43291_ spanishsendaiframeworkfordisasterri.pdf4. https://www.unisdr.org/les/43291_spanishsendaiframeworkfordisasterri.pdfGLOBAL CONTEXT Starting in March 2015, a series of global events and summits were held to define the mechanism for the next fifteen years in order to make progress towards sustainable development.  The first of these summits is the Third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction held in March 2015 in Sendai, Japan.  This marked the moment, in which, characterized by the comprehensive approach, resilience as a concept was prioritized in the international agenda, and building resilience began to be integrated into the United Nations’ normative frameworks and actions as one of the substantive dimensions for sustainable development.  During this conference, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 3 was adopted, which is an instrument that reaffirms the urgent need to predict, plan and address disaster risk reduction, increase resilience in the context of sustainable development and eradicate poverty in order to more effectively protect populations, communities and countries. This in turn requires the harmonization with the PCGIR. The Sendai Framework identifies seven global targets and four priorities to achieve by 2030. The seven defined targets are: Global Target A Substantially reduce global disaster mortality by 2030, aiming to lower the average per 100,000 global mortality rate in the decade 2020–2030 compared to the period 2005–2015. Global Target B Substantially reduce the number of people affected globally by 2030, aiming to lower the average global figure per 100,000 in the decade 2020–2030 compared to the period 2005–2015. Global Target C Reduce direct disaster economic loss in relation to global gross domestic product (GDP) by 2030. Global Target D Substantially reduce disaster damage to critical infrastructure and disruption of basic services, among them health and educational facilities, including through developing their resilience by 2030. Global Target E Substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020. Global Target F Substantially enhance international cooperation to developing countries through adequate and sustainable support to complement their national actions for implementation of this Framework by 2030.  Global Target G Substantially increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard early warning systems and disaster risk information and assessments to people by 2030. The first two targets are historic targets from the global emergency and humanitarian assistance systems: substantially reduce mortality and reduce the number of people affected at a global level by disasters. The next two goals place a strong focus on overcoming key elements that are obstacles to development: reducing economic losses directly caused by disasters related to the global GDP; and the substantial reduction of the damage caused by disasters to vital infrastructure and the interruption of basic services (such as health and educational facilities), including building their resilience. 410 The other three goals refer to the increase in the number of countries that have disaster risk reduction strategies at local and national levels; to the improvement of international cooperation for developing countries through adequate and sustainable support; to the increase in the availability of early warning systems for multiple hazards, and information and assessments about disaster risks that are disseminated to populations.5 The priorities for action6 are: Priority 1: Understanding disaster risk. Priority 2: Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk. Priority 3: Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience. Priority 4: Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.  It is worth highlighting that the concept of “Build Back Better” characterized in the Sendai Framework transcends previous meanings of the term and inserts itself into sustainable development process by linking the assistance stages during the emergency with structural policies that have a long-term vision towards a resilient habitat. These new goals and priorities have been considered for the harmonization of the PCGIR with the Sendai Framework. Following this conference, the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (June 2015, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia), the UN Sustainable Development Summit (September 2015, New York, USA in the framework of the United Nations General Assembly) and the 21st Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 21) as part of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (December 2015, Paris, France) were held. Two more summits were held in 2016 to complete this post-2015 scenario: the World Humanitarian Summit (May 2016, Istanbul, Turkey); and the Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development, Habitat III (October 2016, Ecuador). In all of these areas, and in alignment with what is proposed in the Sendai Framework, the comprehensive vision of the territory and the connection of these issues with sustainable development were consolidated, including disaster risk management and strengthening resilience. REGIONAL CONTEXT The Central American region has reaffirmed its commitment at a global level with the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 in the Third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction. Capitalizing on the experience accumulated, the region is in a position to make progress, in a coordinated and harmonized way, on the application of the new international frameworks.  In June 2010, the Heads of State and the Governments of the SICA countries approved the Central American Policy on Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management (PCGIR) in the 35th Summit meeting held in Panama as a guiding instrument that includes a broader approach in terms of disaster risk management. Since then, PCGIR has been established as an innovative tool aligned with the commitments at the international level and based on countries’ priorities.  With its approval, the PCGIR became (as indicated at the beginning of this document) the most advanced regional public policy instrument in terms of disaster risk management. It has been a key instrument for contributing to comprehensive disaster risk management as one of the five priorities of SICA’s agendas, which defines the following five prioritized areas for its regional integration process: 1. Democratic security; 2. Prevention and mitigation of natural disasters and the effects of climate change; 3. Social integration; 4. Economic integration and; 5. Strengthening regional institutions. 5. https://www.unisdr.org/les/43291_ spanishsendaiframeworkfordisasterri.pdf6. https://www.unisdr.org/les/43291_ spanishsendaiframeworkfordisasterri.pdf11 Additionally, the PCGIR has strengthened the preparation of national disaster risk management policies, plans and strategies in the CEPREDENAC member countries and has stimulated the strengthening of the Regional Mechanism for Humanitarian Assistance in cases of mid to large- scale disasters that forms part of the Central American Integration System (MecReg-SICA).  This is a strategic instrument for the organization, training and planning of an improved response to adverse events.  Additionally, the PCGIR has been a reference point for the CEPREDENAC member countries promoting action on issues such as public and private investment, development of scientific and technical knowledge, education, health and the rights, gender, inclusion and cross-cultural approaches for comprehensive disaster risk management.  In this new stage, the PCGIR proposes to continue and strengthen these work areas by being a reference point for policies and strategies related to the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 in the SICA countries.  CEPREDENAC member countries agreed on a Regional Disaster Risk Reduction Plan (PRRD) in 2014 for the implementation of the PCGIR as a planning, monitoring and tracking instrument, which needs to be adapted in light of the new policy.The PCGIR is the regional public policy instrument specialized in disaster risk management. As an instrument, the PCGIR contains axes, which establish measures, commitments and general actions that will be specified through the Regional Disaster Reduction Plan (PRRD) The policy defines its scope of application and addresses Disaster Risk Management as its theme, in a comprehensive manner as its characteristic.  The content is structured in five areas: A. Disaster Risk Reduction IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. B. DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COMPENSATION TO REDUCE VULNERABILITY. C. DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND ITS RELATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE. D. TERRITORIAL MANAGEMENT, GOVERNABILITY AND GOVERNANCE. E. DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY. Additionally, the PCGIR specifies principles and guides implementation processes, procedures and mechanisms to define the organizational framework for policy implementation. The PCGIR contributes commitments linked to the political and strategic guidelines. The aspects of the implementation (such as budgets, indicators, short and medium-term responsibilities, amongst others) are part of the 2014-2019 Regional Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction that need to be updated so that it is consistent with the current policy.  As a result of the harmonization exercise that was carried out, the agreement was established by each of the articulating axes with four priorities for action, namely: III. WHAT IS THE CENTRAL AMERICAN COMPREHENSIVE DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY (PCGIR)?12 Crosscutting Theme A, Disaster Risk Reduction IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, corresponds to Priorities 1 and 3 from the Sendai Framework, with a focus on the importance of understanding disaster risk in all its dimensions, as well as the value of factors that contribute to public and private investments. These will be made more efficient based on their cost, as well as saving lives and preventing and reducing losses. Crosscutting Theme B, DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COMPENSATION TO REDUCE VULNERABILITY, corresponds to Priorities 1, 2 and 3 regarding the importance of sharing knowledge, exchanging experiences, lessons learned and best practices. It also focuses on the incorporation of knowledge in prevention, mitigation, preparation, response, recovery and rehabilitation in relation to disasters and in academic and non-academic education, at all levels and in all sectors and territories. Crosscutting Theme C, DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH CLIMATE CHANGE contributes to Priorities 1 and 2 by facilitating interaction between science and policies for an effective disaster risk management decision-making process in relation to the environment and the effects of climate variability and climate change, adaptation and the assessment of damages and losses. This includes strengthening the use and sustainable management of eco- systems, applying integrated environmental management approaches and the use of natural resources that incorporate disaster risk reduction. Crosscutting Theme D, TERRITORIAL MANAGEMENT, GOVERNABILITY AND GOVERNANCE responds to Priorities 2 and 3 by achieving effective and efficient disaster risk management at all levels. This takes into account the characteristics of the territory at an urban level as well as rural development, which strengthens local capacities, participation and decision making in all sectors and organizations, involving all actors, fostering collaboration and partnerships through the adoption of disaster risk reduction mechanisms that facilitate sustainable development. All of these results are essential to increase the resilience of the Central American Region. Crosscutting Theme E, DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY links with Priority 4 that ensures further strengthening of disaster preparation where measures should be adopted in advance to prepare and ensure that countries have the capacity for effective disaster response and recovery at all levels that involve the participation of population groups living in conditions of greater vulnerability.  This will result in better assistance as well as achieving disaster resilience in the Central American Region through improved data management and information that facilitates the analysis and dissemination of this data.13 A. PRINCIPLES AND APPROACHES The actions developed within the framework of this policy will be subject to the regional legal regulations established in the Tegucigalpa Protocol, the ODECA Charter and the CEPREDENAC Constitutive Agreement, as well as the national and multilateral norms related to the implementation of the policy fulfilling its principles, guaranteeing prevention in order to create a safe and sustainable environment for the enjoyment of rights by communities in the Central American Region.  1. Principles a. Central American integration. This helps to strengthen the integration of Central America as a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development through the coordination, harmonization and convergence of the policies of the SICA Member states. b. Comprehensiveness. This involves the articulation and integration of all dimensions and scales so that all actions are coordinated and convergent. c. Complementarity. The PCGIR contributes to the promotion of synergies and complementarities between the SICA countries and the selected strategic areas, with public and private sector actors, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to risk management, including international cooperation organizations. d. Gradualness. The PCGIR guides a sequential process of effective and efficient implementation of instruments that guarantee the achievement of policy objectives. Each country implements the policy at its own pace, in a progressive and harmonized manner, in accordance with its national legal system.e. Transparency and participation.  The PCGIR is the monitoring, evaluation and information tool that will be available to all interested parties through various means, including periodic reports to the CEPREDENAC Representative Council, recommendations by the Environmental Subsystem to the SICA Advisory Committee, other relevant regional forums, and the regional and international technical and financial cooperation organizations. As in the policy formulation process, the implementation of the policy established spaces for participation and consultation with the public and private sector and civil society organized at the regional level. f. Attribution of competencies. The PCGIR contributes to disaster risk reduction and the implementation of the policy by each actor, public or private, according to the scope of their competencies within the legal framework. g. Regionality. This principle guides the generation of scale economies, favoring the integration of actions, improving the use of international cooperation and promoting inter- regional horizontal cooperation. h. Territoriality. The PCGIR is a guide for the intervention, organization and transformation processes of habitats with a territorial focus.  It is necessary to emphasize that the concept of territoriality must be implicit in sustainable development planning processes, understanding that in order to achieve this objective it is necessary to adapt economic and social activities to recommended spaces based on their potential, knowledge and risk of the territory, as well as the sustainable use, conservation, and restoration of natural resources.IV. PRINCIPLES, APPROACHES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE14 i. Comprehensive territorial security.  This principle refers to the dynamic and multidimensional nature of security, and the consequent responsibility to evaluate the impact of each decision that can have effects throughout the whole territory, seen as a single unit. This implies a commitment to territorial security that benefits human communities and ecosystems so that certain dynamics do not become hazards or generate risk scenarios for others.  j. Social inclusion. The systematic and permanent process of the societies of the Central American Region will be watched over to enforce, respect and protect the human rights of all individuals of a society through guaranteeing conditions of equality, regardless of people’s social origin. That is, the possibility of access to social relations conducive to equality of the freedom of people to be what they want and value in life.7 2. Approaches a. Gender equality. The PCGIR will guarantee equal opportunities for women and men, including equality in participation and treatment (opportunity / participation / benefits), in order to reduce gaps in gender inequality, highlighting the differentiated way in which women and men are affected by disasters and the differentiated roles that are assigned in risk management as well as in development processes. It is necessary to achieve inclusive, accessible and non-discriminatory empowerment and participation with special attention on the promotion of women’s leadership and the strengthening of their capacities and resilience. This implies integrating the gender equality approach into policies, strategies, plans and projects during the comprehensive disaster risk management cycle and development initiatives, the increase of inclusive decision- making processes, and the generation and access to information and gender-sensitive statistics. b. Human rights. The PCGIR adopts the human rights-based approach, reaffirming that rights are inherent to all human beings without any distinction based on a person’s nationality, place of residence, sex, ethnicity, race, religion, language or any other condition. These rights are interrelated, being they are interdependent and indivisible. Based on international standards, the PCGIR aims to contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights, especially in population groups that are subject to exclusion and discrimination.  c. Multiculturality and interculturality. The cultural diversity that exists in the Central American Region is recognized in all areas, therefore diversity is promoted. This will ensure the strengthening of interculturality, referred to as interaction and exchange between different groups and communities based on respect for diversity with a dynamic vision of cultures, the conviction that close links are only possible through communication and the formation of a broad citizenship in which equal rights exist. B. OBJECTIVES 1. General Objective Promote comprehensive disaster risk management in the development of Central American countries, contributing to the competitiveness of production models and the protection of the environment by developing capacities to prevent, reduce, address and achieve quick recovery from disasters. It will also ensure the sustainability and well-being of the population using a comprehensive (multi- sectoral and territorial) approach and the respect and guarantee of human rights that include multiculturalism, inclusion and gender equality. 2. Special Objectives Encourage the inclusion of disaster risk reduction management in public and private investment. 7. PNUD, et. al. Social inclusion: conceptual framework for the generation of indicators associated with Sustainable Development Goals. www.mx.undp. org/content/dam/ mexico/docs/Publicaciones/.../ODS%20FINAL.pdf?..15 ›Promote the understanding of disaster risk through knowledge, education and information at all levels, with the aim of reducing the social, economic, political and environmental vulnerability of the population. ›Make progress in the coordination of disaster risk management policies, strategies and plans in relation to adapting to climate variability and change, as well as coordinating actions with different areas of governance. ›Promote the strengthening of governability and governance in the Central American territory to contribute to disaster risk reduction and increase resilience. ›Contribute to the strengthening of disaster preparedness to generate an adequate response and build back better. C. SCOPE 1. Regarding to Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management The PCGIR promotes comprehensive disaster risk management that is based on the social, economic, environmental and political- institutional dimensions of development in the region. As part of its thematic scope, this policy includes traditionally addressed topics related to intensive risk management and those related to extensive risk management. Primarily, the concept of intensive risk8 specifically refers to high intensity, medium to low frequency events associated with greater hazards with high mortality rates. The concept concentrates on a few places, where exposure to hazards and vulnerability are combined. In Central America, intensive risk is primarily a feature of large cities, densely populated and strategic areas. The hazards included in this category are earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, hurricanes, tsunamis and severe droughts. Extensive risk refers to daily low intensity and high frequency events. These represent a very high proportion of total disaster events and are rapidly increasing. In Central America, extensive risk  primarily affects scattered rural settlements and the livelihoods associated with these populations. It is especially debilitating for agriculture and livestock. It also generates important impacts on precarious urban settlements located in high risk areas that are highly vulnerable to hazards linked to hydro- meteorological phenomena. The hazards included in this category are, among others, gales, floods and landslides.  8. Intensive risk is mainly a feature of large cities or densely populated areas that are not only exposed to intense hazards such as strong earthquakes, active volcanoes, heavy floods, tsunamis or major storms, but also have high levels of vulnerability to these dangers9. Extensive risk is usually high in places where communities are exposed and vulnerable to recurrent localized flooding, landslides, storms or droughts.  Extensive risk is often associated with poverty, urbanization and environmental degradation16 The PCGIR addresses both the reduction and adaptation of existing risks and the prevention of future risks. In this sense, a distinction is made between prospective and corrective management. Prospective management10 is carried out according to the risks that can be created through new investment and development initiatives, both for the investment itself and for a specific society and its ecosystems. This is a comprehensive component of urban and rural development management, investment project management and environmental management. Corrective management11  corresponds to interventions in existing risk conditions as a result of previous and current development processes. This is usually done through infrastructure and protection works. This policy also tends towards a corrective, transformative management of social, environmental production and settlement that accentuates both vulnerability and socio- natural and anthropogenic hazards.  The Central American Region prioritizes the people-centered approach of disaster risk prevention with special attention to basic services, livelihoods and critical infrastructure (health, education, communications, production). It also focuses on the prevention of disaster risk that affects cultural heritage, socioeconomic assets and ecosystems, contributing to building resilience.2. In relation to territorial ordinance and development Disasters as manifestations of risk in “impact territories” have a defined territorial circumscription based on their impacts. However, the causal factors of risk and disasters (both physical events and the different components within vulnerability) do not necessarily generate the same effects in territories.12 Often, the “causal territory” differs substantially from the “ impact territory”, in terms of different administrative units at different levels; such is the case of hydrographic basins that cross borders. It is understood that implementing actions derived from this policy, at national and local levels, will be the responsibility of Member States in accordance with their political, strategic and institutional frameworks. Comprehensive disaster risk management will be based on a multi-hazard approach and must include planning processes and public and private investment in Central American territories in order to contribute to sustainable and safe development. According to the principle of conferral of powers, each public and private entity must reduce risk in their own social or productive activity and avoid creating new risks.   10. Prospective risk management: through actions, this approach addresses and seeks to prevent the development of new or greater disaster risks. It focuses on addressing risks that may arise in the future if risk reduction policies are not implemented; examples include better planning of land use or water supply systems that are resilient to disasters.11. Addresses and seeks to eliminate or reduce disas- ter risks that are already present and that need to be managed and immediately reduced. Some exam- ples are the adaptation of critical infrastructure or the relocation of populations or exposed assets. 12. Vulnerability is understood as the conditions deter- mined by physical, social, economic, and environmen- tal factors that increase the susceptibility of an indivi- dual, community or system to the impact of hazards.17 Five (5) crosscutting themes were identified, outlining the main challenges faced by the Central American Region to reduce disaster risk linked to the Sendai Framework. In each crosscutting theme, measures are identified and coordinated to guide the definition of actions that will achieve compliance with the PCGIR. A. DISASTER RISK REDUCTION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT “Public and private investment in disaster risk prevention and reduction through structural and non-structural measures are essential to enhance the economic, social, health and cultural resilience of persons, communities, countries and their assets…” - Priority 3 of the Sendai Framework This pillar is fundamentally related to Priority 3 of the Sendai Framework, “Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience”, and also with Priority 1, “Understanding disaster risk”. Disaster risk prevention and reduction in both public and private investments through structural and non- structural measures are essential factors. This increases Central American countries’ resilience at economic, social, sanitary and cultural levels, in addition to human rights and gender equality.  Investing in disaster risk management reduces the costs of emergency response, which is essential to save lives, reduce damages and losses, and improve conditions during recovery and reconstruction periods. In short, it lays a more solid foundation for sustainable economic development.  Countries in the region need to homologize and standardize public and private investment regulatory frameworks and apply these to territorial development in an integrated manner at regional, national, local, and community levels. Likewise, it is important to create damage and loss evaluation methodologies. Moreover, it is necessary to carry out financial analysis that facilitates the dissemination of regional information investment in disaster risk reduction activities that use a multi-sectoral and territorial approach.Expected outcome Significantly reduce damage and loss caused by disasters by 2030 and contribute to safeguarding public and private investment through the use of information, as well as the application of designed and updated methodologies and tools. The measures considered for Crosscutting Theme A are: 1. Creation and systematization of public and private information for investment 2. Evaluation of public and private investment 3. Planning public and private investment 4. Protecting public and private investment 5. Promoting public and private investment 1. Creation and systematization of public and private information for investment. Decision-making is based on understanding disaster risk. This includes decision-making regarding investments, in which having quality information is of the utmost importance, in order to develop and apply the proper measures.  Therefore, data collection and analysis should be encouraged, as well as the management and use of relevant data and information in order to ensure its dissemination while taking into account the region’s financial and economic needs.  CEPREDENAC member states and disaster risk reduction governing bodies will have established criteria for quantifying damage and loss caused by disasters, with systematized information (disaggregated by age, sex, ethnic group and disabilities). They will have, as well, data on migration or displacement caused by disasters, as well as other accessible and relevant information for decision-making when designing or evaluating investment projects. CEPREDENAC will implement the use of information platforms that facilitate the understanding of risk and provide data on the possible magnitude and probability of the occurrence of multiple hazards.V. CROSSCUTTING THEMES AND MEASURES18 2. Evaluating Public and Private Investment Homologized economic evaluation methodologies will be adopted to include disaster risk management in public investment. This will encourage its adoption in the private sector, accompanied by a systematic training process for technical staff directly involved in designing and evaluating projects in their countries and in the region. It will be carried out by CEPREDENAC member states through the relevant regional and national entities.  3. Planning Public and Private Investment Planning both public and private investment (especially investments in critical infrastructure and basic services, including urbanization) must consider risk in order to reduce it. In addition, it is necessary to define and develop economic and financial protection instruments and include the possibility of applying budgetary analysis and planning instruments that are available and in use in Central America, such as insurance, loans, reserve funds, tax instruments, pensions, trusts, compensatory funds, and others.  Value-added and productive economic activities in the region will be planned and implemented in accordance with levels of exposure to disaster risk, establishing mechanisms to reduce or control these risks, as well as to avoid creating new risks.  Guidelines will be developed for safe public and private investment in productive infrastructure in all its forms in order to reduce the vulnerability of populations, protect livelihoods and reduce risk in the region. 4. Protecting Public and Private Investment To achieve that public and private investment is protected, the risk context where investments are made must be considered. This requires continuous adjustments and updates to disaster risk reduction regulations. Central American countries must analyze the inclusion of reimbursable and non- reimbursable financial instruments to diversify and transfer risk, strengthen the resilience of economic and productive actors and adequately address disaster response and reconstruction.  Competent bodies will promote the adoption of financial protection investments through insurance mechanisms, encouraging the creation of products and mechanisms for subsidiary and solidarity-based protection. In full congruence with existing policies, and other policies that may be established in the future. Actions will be coordinated to implement activities related to social and natural hazards and comprehensive disaster risk management. The necessary synergies with other SICA strategies and policies in terms of investments related to disaster risk management will be promoted. 5. Promoting Public and Private Investment The sustainability of risk management actions will be made possible by establishing financial, cooperation and technical assistance mechanisms; as well as work agreements that encourage public and private initiatives that integrate disaster risk reduction in the design, construction and strengthening of social infrastructure, considering social inclusion aspects.  The private sector has considerable potential to contribute to disaster risk management, especially for critical infrastructure and basic services such as energy and water-related infrastructure (e.g., hydroelectric dams), sanitation, transport, energy, communication, among others. In addition, education and health services, both from the public and private sector, are sensitive areas that need a renewed focus. CEPREDENAC member states will have a specific mechanism within budget formulation rules that will enable the identification and monitoring of resources allocated for disaster prevention, adaptation, mitigation, response, rehabilitation and reconstruction. Countries will be encouraged to adopt and finance concrete investment and cooperation measures to strengthen and protect social services infrastructure based on potential exposure to multiple hazards.19 B. DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COMPENSATION TO REDUCE VULNERABILITY “Policies and practices for disaster risk management should be based on an understanding of disaster risk in all its dimensions of vulnerability, capacity, exposure of persons and assets, hazard characteristics and the environment.” Priority 1 of the Sendai Framework This pillar is primarily related to Priority 1 for Action of the Sendai Framework, “Understanding disaster risk”, with Priority 2 for Action, “Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk”, and with Priority 3 for Action, “Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience”. The majority of Central American countries have conditions of poverty, extreme poverty and other forms of social differentiation, as well as food insecurity conditions, which increase their vulnerability to different hazards.  The direct relationship between these population conditions and disasters is recognized. As a result, investing in resilience is one of the main strategies to reduce these populations’ vulnerability to disasters, as well as to create a positive impact on their living conditions, therefore improving multidimensional poverty indexes. Likewise, there are differential conditions in the population related to gender, generations, cultural and linguistic diversity, limitations due to disabilities, geographical barriers, migratory conditions and other situations that increase the likelihood of disasters. Therefore, comprehensive disaster risk management must be included in programs that impact the development, protection and social compensation of these groups. Expected outcome Increased knowledge management, research and exchange of experiences that contribute to having a better informed and educated Central American population and strengthening a culture of disaster prevention and resilience. The measures for Crosscutting Theme B are: 1. Incorporating disaster risk management in formal and non-formal education 2. Research and knowledge management 3. Exchange of experiences 1. Incorporating disaster risk management in formal and non-formal education The harmonization, coordination and implementation of regulatory, institutional and social frameworks in formal and non-formal education will incorporate comprehensive disaster risk management and climate change adaptation including multi-sectoral and interinstitutional financing mechanisms, cooperation and management at regional, national, local and community levels in an inclusive, accessible, participatory and people-centered manner. Understanding disaster risk in training processes and promoting a culture of prevention will be a priority to be consolidated in formal education services at primary, secondary and higher education levels, in addition to the existing non- formal education services. Relevant institutions at a regional level in each Central American country will ensure the implementation of policies, strategies, programs, plans and actions related to this approach.  This understanding of risk includes concrete criteria on the differentiated way in which men and women, disabled people, senior citizens and communities with different world views relate to disaster risk and the differentiated capacities to manage disasters. Public promotion is needed on gender equality approaches and universal access in terms of disaster prevention, response, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. The necessary efforts will be made to create content and proposals that integrate communities’ ancestral wisdom with countries’ multicultural characteristics. 20 2. Research and knowledge management Gathering information through vulnerability and exposure studies and the dissemination of this information is fundamental for decision-making at a political level. In this sense, information platforms will be strengthened to exchange knowledge on disaster risk and promote dialogue and cooperation between management and scientific and technological communities, with the goal of fostering the generation of exchange networks.  CEPREDENAC will coordinate the development of scientific and technological information exchange and integration mechanisms, based on installed capacity and information produced by government entities, universities, institutes, research centers, and other specialized bodies.  Recuperation and dissemination actions will be carried out for instruments, strategies and best practices in disaster risk management and collaborative work that combines scientific/ technological experience and communities’ ancestral knowledge will be promoted.  3. Exchange of experiences The exchange of experiences, lessons learned and best practices will be promoted to transfer knowledge to public officials at all levels; civil society, communities, the most-at-risk groups, the private sector and others. This will improve prevention, adaptation, mitigation, preparation and response actions to emergencies or disasters, as well as strengthening the recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction phases.  The use of common information exchange and learning mechanisms will be promoted throughout Central America, as well as with other regions and countries in the Americas and the world, in order to strengthen capacities for disaster management and comprehensive disaster risk management at regional, national and local levels.C. DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH CLIMATE CHANGE “To promote the conduct of comprehensive surveys on multi-hazard disaster risks and the development of regional disaster risk assessments and maps, including climate change scenarios”. - Priority 1 from the Sendai Framework This pillar is related to Priority 1 of the Sendai Framework, “Understanding disaster risk”, and Priority 2,“Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk”. The Central American region will consolidate and coordinate actions in the areas of environmental management, disaster risk management, and climate change adaptation, connecting strategic actions through a coordinated or joint agenda between water resource, environmental, climate change, and disaster risk management actors.  This point is key as a regional mirror of the comprehensive and integrated approach of all international agendas related to sustainable development that were cited at the beginning of this document. This takes into account regional development (in addition to commitments made by countries) as defined for the implementation of the Sendai Framework, but also in the Paris Agreement, the New Urban Agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and others, and also involves harmonizing policies, plans and instruments that facilitate the integration of environmental management, climate change adaptation and disaster risk management in Central America.13 This coordinated regional agenda will have an impact on national public policies on humanitarian issues such as displacement, migration, violence, community health and inclusion by incorporating these variables into development planning using a territorial approach. 13. Environmental agreements such as the Basel, Rotterdam, Stockholm and Minamata Conventions must be considered.21 In addition, this will focus on the enormous potential of facilitating possible access to international financing, as it will enable the diversification of funding sources and have a comprehensive impact in the region in terms of sustainable development with a greater emphasis on each of the three pillars (environmental management, climate change, and disaster risk).  Expected outcome Generate, update and apply ecosystem-based approaches in Central American territories, for disaster risk reduction and adapting to climate change and climate variability, contributing to the reduction of vulnerability. The measures for Crosscutting Theme C are: 1. Harmonization of policies, strategies, and regulations on disaster risk reduction, environmental management and climate change adaptation.  2. Relationship between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation.  1. Harmonization of policies, strategies, and regulations on disaster risk reduction, environmental management and climate change adaptation.  Taking into consideration the regulatory framework on issues such as the environment, climate change and disaster risk, competent bodies in Central America will coordinate the harmonization, coordination and application of shared political instruments and strategies, achieving synergies on natural resources use and disaster risk reduction.  Likewise, it is important to highlight that healthy and resilient ecosystems also act as natural barriers that mitigate the negative impacts that hydro-meteorological events can have on people’s livelihoods. Therefore, measures to align policies, strategies, disaster risk, environmental management plans and their shared components and instruments will be strengthened at a national level. These will primarily include climate change adaption, loss and damage assessments, natural and cultural heritage risk management (especially with respect to preventing forest fires) and the integrated management of water sources. At the same time, measures to support ecosystem conservation and restoration will be developed.  Collaboration will be encouraged among specialized mechanisms and bodies (committees, technical groups and others) in integrated risk management within Central America, with a view towards applying relevant tools for disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation, biodiversity, the ecosystem approach, sustainable development, poverty eradication, the environment, agriculture, healthcare, food and nutrition, environmental emergencies and other areas when appropriate.15 2. Relationship between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation Even though disaster risk management and climate change have different conceptual frameworks and objectives, the trajectories of both issues converge at different points. Specifically, this occurs in climate change adaptation and disaster risk management, which are supported by shared instruments for their management, such as territorial planning. Moreover, they generate and require similar knowledge and information and often overlap in their scopes.  At the international level, the generation of the Warsaw Mechanism for Loss and Damage through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change recognizes the importance of the impact of disasters, which 14. http://www.miambiente.gob.pa/images/ stories/ documentos_prevda/Resultado_1_Plan_ Plurianual_ del_Subsistema_Ambiental_del_SICA_(CCAD_ CEPREDENAC_CRRH.pdf consultado el 21/11/2016.15. “An environmental emergency is defined as a su- dden onset disaster or accident resulting from natu- ral, man-made or a combination of the same, which cause or could cause severe environmental dama- ge, as well as damage to human health and/or liveli- hoods”. 15, UNEP/ GC.22/INF/5, November 2002.22 represent a convergence point between climate change and risk management. The convergences and divergences between the two issues will need to be assessed at a regional level, to strengthen coordination areas by enhancing cross-participation and analyze the institutional and regulatory processes that are necessary to streamline efforts and generate proposals that take climate change and disaster risk management into account from the beginning. Within the framework of the various strategies and agendas that are already in place that are developed during the lifetime of this policy, actions will be promoted to strengthen climate change adaptation capacities, taking into account vulnerabilities in the territories. Incorporating sustainable development and disaster risk reduction concepts into planning instruments, plans, programs and projects deriving from the policy frameworks will be promoted. Work will be carried out with an approach based on climate change adaptation, i.e.: an approach in which biodiversity and ecosystem services are used as comprehensive strategies for people’s adaptation to the adverse effects of climate change, thus maintaining and increasing their resilience and reducing ecosystem and human vulnerability.16 D. TERRITORIAL MANAGEMENT, GOVERNABILITY, AND GOVERNANCE “... Strengthening disaster risk governance for prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and rehabilitation is therefore necessary and fosters collaboration and partnership across mechanisms and institutions for the implementation of instruments relevant to disaster risk reduction and sustainable development.” Priority 2 of the Sendai Framework.  This pillar is fundamentally related with Priority 2 of the Sendai Framework, “Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk”, and with Priority 3, “Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience”. As governance is the setting in which local governments respond to citizens’ needs, suitable frameworks will be promoted, as well as political and administrative processes that facilitate disaster risk management in the territory. The sustainability of urban and rural risk management and reduction require adequate governance. To that end, institutional and legislative systems in Central America at a regional, national and municipal level will appropriate the comprehensive disaster risk management.  Substantially expanding the participation base in areas of governance will be a challenge, especially in the private sector, civil society and academia, which encompass a wide range of actors, who range from those most closely linked to risk management, people who create urban development or investment projects that impact territories, human rights defenders and individuals that participate in the real estate market. The administration of local governments with a comprehensive vision of development, competitiveness and territorial governance will be promoted by strengthening their regulatory, technical, financial, and institutional capacities and incorporating comprehensive disaster risk management in local development processes in a participatory and inclusive manner. In addition, it will support the development of women’s capacities and will empower this population in preparation for disasters ensuring alternative livelihoods in post-disaster situations.  Furthermore, public and private investments will be based on community needs. This will increase urban and rural resilience in knowledge management processes and strengthen local capacities through resource mobilization and timely and effective access to information. Expected outcome Increased community and local government capacities by 2030 to consolidate investments, actions and commitments for integrated disaster risk reduction management that increase resilience. The measures for Crosscutting Theme D are: 1. Strengthening capacities 2. Urban risk management 3. Land management16. CDB, 2009. Connecting Biodiversity and Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation: Second report from an Ad Hoc group of technical experts on biodiversity and climate change. Montreal, Technical Series Num.  4123 1. Strengthening capacities It is important to guide regional action that promotes capacity development that addresses common and cross-border disaster risks. These include, among others, applying ecosystem-based approaches to shared resources, such as river basins or marine-coastal zones to build resilience and reduce disaster risk, including epidemics and displacement. Furthermore, strengthening local capacities to reduce risk and respond to disasters will be intensified to consolidate communities and territories’ autonomy and resilience. There will be a particular focus on responding to the needs of those disproportionally affected such as girls, women, people with disabilities, migrants and indigenous people. Government institutions and other relevant bodies will coordinate and promote the systematic integration of land and environmental management and urban and rural management into local development. 2. Urban Risk Management Urbanization implies the concentration of a population. Therefore, cities are the most significant impacted by disasters, both in terms of human life and the loss of assets and services.  Likewise, the unplanned growth of our cities, the informal settlement of the most environmentally fragile areas (elevation slopes, ravines, public lands in urban river flood plains) by the most vulnerable populations -who are driven out of cities by rising real estate prices-, creates new risk patterns and exposes a significant number of people to increased risks, making disaster risk management in urban areas particularly complex and urgent. Considering this at-risk concentration in large and intermediate cities in the region, and the resulting high exposure of the population, infrastructure and productive assets to disaster risk, relevant institutions will make progress in institutional and local capacity development for planning (land- use and development) using a risk management approach. Likewise, the exchange of experiences between cities will be promoted as a dynamic strategy for these efforts.  3. Territorial ordinance Progress will be made on developing guidelines to include the comprehensive disaster risk management approach, and human settlement and territorial development policies and plans. They will be based on existing laws and regulations in each country in the region. Land- use planning and management will be recognized as structured tools that need to integrate the disaster risk management approach. The proper use of soil, territorial security and awareness- raising to prevent building in high-risk areas will be promoted by applying codes, rules, regulations, in addition to having design, material and construction manuals.  Coordination mechanisms will be established for information management to generate contributions that guide the resilient development of different types of infrastructure, including housing, bridges, highways, schools, hospitals, among others.  Access will be considered a requirement for comprehensive disaster risk management. As a result, a universal design will be prevalent throughout different types of infrastructure for daily and emergency use (such as temporary shelters) and, in their absence, suitable accommodation for people with disabilities will be incorporated.24 E. DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY “... To further strengthen disaster preparedness for response, take action in anticipation of events, integrate disaster risk reduction in the response of preparedness and ensure that capacities are in place for effective response and recovery at all levels...” - Priority 4 of the Sendai Framework. This pillar is fundamentally related with Priority 4 for Action of the Sendai Framework, “Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction”. Disaster management is understood as the organization, planning and application of preparation measures to respond and recover from disasters.17 Expected outcome Increase the application of coordination mechanisms for humanitarian aid, information management and assessing damages, as well as applying integrated strategies to recover and rebuild in a transformative manner. The measures for Crosscutting Theme E are: 1. Humanitarian aid coordination mechanisms for disaster response 2. Information management and damage assessment 3. Preparation and implementation to “Build Back Better” 1. Humanitarian aid coordination mechanisms for disaster response The Central American region promotes the consolidation of a regional humanitarian aid mechanism for disaster response through the Central American Integration System (MecReg- SICA), which is implemented in every country through national instruments as the foundation for humanitarian aid coordination centers in each country and procedural manuals for disaster response from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs in each country.  Coordinated disaster response will be promoted by consolidating specialized national groups in order to operationalize the Central American Task Force (FTC MecReg-SICA) to coordinate the actions of the specialized groups that are part of the task force. This process will be strengthened by implementing the Central American Procedure to facilitate the transport of humanitarian relief items shipped by land. It must be taken into account that the MecReg-SICA and its regional and national instruments must be periodically updated to strengthen and consolidate the mechanism, ensuring an agile, expeditious and timely response to emergency or disaster situations that occur in one or more countries and require humanitarian and technical assistance from other countries. 2. Damage Assessment and Information Management For an adequate coordinated response to disasters in Central American countries within the MecReg-SICA framework, developing information mechanisms or systems for national application, that are coordinated through regional platforms is of the utmost importance. Developing these mechanisms will be promoted, while at the same time, measures for their maintenance must be established. Having quality information will improve both preparedness and decision-making to attend the population, establishing needs, assessing damage and quantifying loss.  As a result, information management and communication channels between different countries will be improved. with support from CEPREDENAC. Monitoring, forecasting and warning processes will be strengthened, facilitating information collection and analysis after obtaining quantitative and qualitative statistical information, with data disaggregated by sex, age, disability and territory.  17. Disaster management cannot prevent or completely eliminate hazards; its focus lies in creating and implementing preparation and other types of plans to reduce the impact from disasters and to “Build Back Better”.  (UNISDR terminology)25 National systems, with support from CEPREDENAC, will establish a geographic information system that enables the correlation of information on hazards and vulnerability at a regional level with other vital information to make relevant decisions to respond to disasters in Central American countries. To this end, available tools in the region and in countries will be used. 3. Preparation and implementation to “Build Back Better” Adopting recovery and reconstruction plans to guide post-disaster actions is considered a vital aspect for sustainable development in Central America. It can be achieved through the application of codes and regulations for physical, economic and social development. The continuity of the early recovery approach will be promoted as a multidimensional process that connects the humanitarian action phase with the reconstruction phase, reestablishing individuals’ capacities and livelihoods, while institutions and territories plan and take action during recovery with a view towards development.  Instruments to evaluate, plan, implement, finance and monitor recovery processes will be established, strengthened and revised, placing emphasis on the “Build Back Better” principle and the need to prepare for disaster recovery (especially with respect to livelihoods). This will involve educating and training key actors at a national and regional level. For its implementation, this Policy identifies the main processes, instruments, and mechanisms required, being the following: A. INSTITUTIONAL, ORGANIZATIONAL AND FUNCTIONAL COORDINATION AND STRENGTHENING CEPREDENAC member states, through its Council of Representatives, civil protection and disaster risk management governing bodies and national systems, its Executive Secretariat, SICA entities, secretariats, and specialized institutions will adopt institutional actions that facilitate the implementation of the PCGIR as a high-level political platform, in accordance with the mandate of SICA heads of state and government. • The Representative Council coordinates the activities that facilitate the implementation of the PCGIR in Central America and the provisions of the CEPREDENAC constituent agreement.  • Civil protection and disaster risk management governing bodies and national systems will promote and implement the PCGIR in accordance to each CEPREDENAC member country’s regulatory frameworks. It is essential to continue supporting processes that make the policy approach viable at a national level, while considering security, disaster risk management, recovery and reconstruction criteria. • SICA entities, secretariats and specialized institutions will coordinate efforts to fulfill the PCGIR in the framework of SICA’s fundamental objective: to carry out integration efforts in Central America, to make it a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development, firmly based on respect and the protection and promotion of human rights. This implies consolidating regional coordination mechanisms between secretariats in the framework of modernizing the SICA. VI. IMPLEMENTATION PROCESSES, INSTRUMENTS AND MECHANISMS26 B. PARTICIPATION FROM SICA, CIVIL SOCIETY, THE PRIVATE SECTOR, FINANCIAL ENTITIES AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION SICA entities, secretariats and specialized institutions’ participation in support of states through civil protection and disaster risk management governing bodies and national systems will ensure participation from organized civil society, volunteers, community organizations, the private sector, indigenous communities and high-risk groups, as this is a crucial element in achieving comprehensive disaster risk management.  These actors play an important role: their commitment, goodwill, knowledge, experience and resources intensify efforts carried out for comprehensive disaster risk management through their contributions and support, creating partnerships in accordance with country priorities and needs. Different actors are important in defining cooperation modalities and applying this policy in a coordinated manner. With respect to international cooperation to reduce disaster risk, this includes several sources and mechanisms that are considered fundamental and of vital importance to continue complementary efforts that are carried out to reduce disaster risk.  C. STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS The member states, through the corresponding bodies and processes, will strengthen their legal instruments to institutionalize, internalize, and appropriate the content of this policy, in accordance with their needs and priorities. This will entail a growing interest in these actions at a regional level, and therefore, at the global level as well. D. PCGIR IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT The implementation, control, and monitoring of this policy will be carried out in accordance with the Regional Disaster Risk Reduction Plan (PRRD), which will be periodically evaluated and updated. To monitor and assess the PCGIR aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, indicators will be developed for each of the five central pillars, consistent with national systems and regional mechanisms.  E. FINANCING THE PCGIR To implement this policy, financial mechanisms will be coordinated to manage funds, resources, and technical assistance, which are complementary to CEPREDENAC member States’ national budgets, alongside reimbursable and non-reimbursable funds from international cooperation and public and private sector institutions and organizations.27 A. STRUCTURE The SICA General Secretariat is responsible for facilitating the promotion and coordination dynamic to implement the PCGIR with other bodies and secretariats from the system. CEPREDENAC, through its Council of Representatives and Executive Secretariat, monitors the compliance with the PCGIR in Central America, in accordance with the competencies established by the CEPREDENAC constituent agreement.  The Regional Consultative Forum of the Central American Policy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management is the mechanism for inter-sectoral and inter-governmental consultation, which carries out periodic reviews of progress made in implementing the PCGIR. B. PLANNING FRAMEWORK CEPREDENAC oversees the coordination in Central America to update the PRRD, which is part of the strategic and planning framework to implement the PCGIR. For their part, disaster risk reduction governing bodies and national systems will include PRRD compliance in their planning processes. Likewise, under this policy’s guidance, SICA entities, secretariats and specialized institutions will incorporate the disaster risk management approach in their respective policies, plans, programs and projects, in accordance with SICA’s priority agenda. CEPREDENAC coordinates the planning, organization and implementation of the PCGIR with international cooperation and participation from financial institutions, in accordance with the principles of appropriation, alignment and harmonization, results-based management and accountability approaches.  C. MONITORING AND ACCOUNTABILITY Civil protection and disaster risk management governing bodies and national systems are responsible for contributing to the implementation of the PCGIR, through their own legal frameworks related to comprehensive disaster risk management. They are also responsible for submitting information for monitoring implementation progress, for which implementation progress reports from the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015- 2030 are used as a reference.  About accountability, CEPREDENAC will periodically prepare and publish regional reports on the implementation of the PCGIR, and it will maintain its internal platforms for monitoring the PCGIR and operational follow-up of its programs and projects. Likewise, CEPREDENAC will present the required implementation reports in the framework of the SICA Regional Cooperation Information System. Participation from organized civil society, academia, professional associations, the private sector, companies, financial institutions, foundations and others will be promoted for the purposes of PCGIR monitoring and accountability.VII. ORGANIZATIONAL FRAMEWORK TO IMPLEMENT THE POLICY28 Editing and publication by the Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic. (CEPREDENAC) Av. Hincapié 21-72 Zone 13 Guatemala City, Republic of Guatemala PBX: (502) 2390-0200 CEPREDENAC www.cepredenac.orgEdition and publication by Coordination Center for the Prevention of Disasters in Central America and Dominican Republic. (CEPREDENAC) Av. Hincapié 21-72 Zone 13 Guatemala City, Republic of Guatemala PBX: (502) 2390-0200 CEPREDENAC www.cepredenac.org /CEPREDENAC